Racket is distributed under the MIT license and the Apache License,
version 2.0, at your option. However, the Racket runtime system includes
components distributed under other licenses. In short:

* The Racket CS runtime system embeds Chez Scheme, which is distributed
  under the Apache License, version 2.0. This runtime system is built
  from code in "cs" and "ChezScheme".

* The Racket BC runtime system includes code distributed under the GNU
  Lesser General Public License, either version 3 of the license, or (at
  your option) any later version. This runtime system is built from code
  in "bc".

Except for Windows executables that are created with the “embed DLLs”
option, the runtime system remains separate as a shared library or
additional executable, which means that it is dynamically linked and can
be replaced with a modified variant by users.

See the file "LICENSE-APACHE.txt" for the full text of the Apache
License, version 2.0.

See the file "LICENSE-MIT.txt" for the full text of the MIT license.

See the file "LICENSE-LGPL.txt" for the full text of the GNU Lesser
General Public License, version 3.

The source code of Racket is available at
https://github.com/racket/racket and
https://download.racket-lang.org/releases.

The Racket runtime system includes or extends several components which
have their own licenses.

The following are used in all Racket executables:

* SHA-224 and SHA-256 implementation from Mbed TLS
  Copyright © 2006–2015, ARM Limited, All Rights Reserved
  Mbed TLS is licensed under the Apache License, version 2.0.
  Code from Mbed TLS can be found in "rktio/rktio_sha2.c" and
  "zuo/zuo.c".

* ZLib
  Copyright © 1995–2022 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler
  Zlib is distributed under a liberal license: see https://zlib.net.
  Code translated from earlier versions of Zlib can be found in
  "<collects>/file/{gzip,gunzip}.rkt". Racket CS executables also use
  Zlib via Chez Scheme: a copy of Zlib can be found in
  "ChezScheme/zlib". Additionally, on some platforms, Zlib is packaged
  with the support libraries for racket/draw.

* Terminal support from Chez Scheme
  Both Racket BC and Racket CS use primitive terminal support code from
  Chez Scheme’s expression editor, which is based on a command-line
  editor for Scheme developed from 1989 through 1994 by C. David Boyer.
  This code can be found in "ChezScheme/c/expeditor.c". The expression
  editor, like the rest of Chez Scheme, is licensed under the Apache
  License, version 2.0.

The following are used in all Racket executables for Windows:

* MemoryModule
  Copyright © 2004–2015 by Joachim Bauch / mail@joachim-bauch.de
  https://www.joachim-bauch.de
  MemoryModule is licensed under the Mozilla Public License, version
  2.0: see https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/ for the full text of
  the license. Code from MemoryModule can be found in
  "start/MemoryModule.{c,h}".

The following are used only in Racket BC executables:

* libscheme
  Copyright © 1994 Brent Benson
  All rights reserved.
  See the file "LICENSE-libscheme.txt" for the full text of the
  libscheme license. Code from libscheme can be found in "bc/src".

* GNU Lightning
  Copyright © 1994, 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2011 Free
  Software Foundation, Inc.
  GNU Lightning is distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public
  License, version 3, or (at your option) any later version.
  A fork of GNU Lightning can be found in "bc/src/lightning".

* GNU MP Library
  Copyright © 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2007 Free
  Software Foundation, Inc.
  GMP is distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License,
  version 3, or (at your option) any later version.
  Code from GMP can be found in "bc/src/gmp".

* libunwind
  Copyright © 2003–2005 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P.
  libunwind is distributed under the MIT license.
  Code from libunwind can be found in "bc/src/unwind".

* libffi
  Copyright © 1996–2019 Anthony Green, Red Hat, Inc and others.
  libffi is distributed under the MIT license.
  A copy of libffi can be found in "bc/foreign/libffi".

* random.inc
  Based on "random.c" from FreeBSD 2.2.
  Copyright © 1983, 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
  This code is distributed under a three-clause BSD license.
  Code from FreeBSD 2.2 can be found in "bc/src/random.inc".

In addition to the Racket runtime system, the default mode of building
Racket will install some packages, which are distributed under their own
licenses.

The Racket code for all packages in the main Racket distribution is
primarily under the MIT license and the Apache License, version 2.0, at
your option, but some packages contain Racket code under other
permissive licenses.

Some components of Racket are implemented using additional shared
libraries. For some platforms and installation modes (especially for
Windows and Mac OS), these libraries are distributed in
platform-specific Racket packages; in other cases, they may be included
with the operating system or installable via the system’s package
manager. In all cases, these libraries are dynamically loaded and can be
replaced with modified variants by users. In particular:

* Even the “minimal Racket” distribution may include shared libraries
  for OpenSSL, SQLite, and/or Editline, depending on the platform.

  The Windows distribution also includes GNU libiconv, which is
  distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License, either
  version 3 of the license, or (at your option) any later version. See
  the byte converter documentation for further details.

* The Racket Drawing Toolkit is implemented using Cairo, Pango,
  HarfBuzz, FriBidi, FreeType, FontConfig, and Glib. Some of these
  libraries are distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License:
  see the applicable platform-specific Racket packages for details.

* The Racket Graphical Interface Toolkit is primarily implemented using
  racket/draw and the native GUI framework for each platform, but can be
  configured to always use GTK, instead.  On Mac OS, racket/gui also
  uses the libraries MMTabBarView and/or PSMTabBarControl, which are
  distributed under a three-clause BSD license.

* The math/bigfloat library uses GNU MP and MPFR, which are distributed
  under the GNU Lesser General Public License, either version 3 of the
  license, or (at your option) any later version.

* Files generated by Scribble’s LaTeX renderer use LaTeX packages with
  various licenses, such as the LaTeX Project Public License. Some of
  these are distributed with the Racket package "scribble-lib"; others
  may be installed as part of your TeX distribution.

For further details about the licenses for these libraries, see the
"LICENSE.txt" files included with the applicable platform-specific
packages.

Similarly, your Racket distribution or installation may have been
configured with additional packages, including third-party packages,
which could use other licenses: see the documentation or "LICENSE.txt"
file included with each package for information about the applicable
licenses.

The Racket source distribution also includes build scripts generated by
GNU Autoconf which are under various licenses, including the GNU General
Public License with Autoconf exception; however, these files are not
installed with Racket.
